# countdown
Efficient and unique solutions to Countdown's Numbers game

## Intro
The numbers game on the British TV show [Countdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Countdown_(game_show))
involves attempting to combine positive integers into a target number
using addition, positive subtraction, multiplication and division
without remainder. The problem is interesting computationally, even though
it is restricted to exponential complexities, being more complicated than
the subset-sum problem. A naive solution is easy to implement, but is
very inefficient and takes time even for small input sizes. Improvements
can be made by restricting the set of arithmetic expressions being considered,
and some such improvements were suggested in literature (Alliot 2015,
[arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.05450)) but there is more that can be done.
The rapidly inflating number of possible expressions is the main source
of complexity, so we should aim to exclude all redundancies.

## How it Works
We iterate creating new combinations of expressions but:
- the first operand should be larger than the first, or have a larger address
- for repeated operations, the operands should be decreasing (10+5+2, not 5+10+2)
- no addition after subtraction or multiplication after division
- do not add or subtract an addition or subtraction
- do not multiply or divide with a multiplication or division

There are other possibilities that are technically distinct but are still 
uninteresting and will inflate the set we are working with. Examples are
multiplying/dividing with 1, additions like `a/d+b/d` or `b-a=a`.
Excluding those cases is not enough, as it would still not exclude e.g. `a/d+c+b/d`.
Therefore we can use a dictionary that maps masks (structures that enumerate
how many copies of each input were used; this can be a simple bitmask if
there are no duplicates) to each value that was found.
Then, a solution will be excluded if there exists already a solution using a (multi)set
of numbers that is a proper subset of the set of numbers used by said solution.
This is the most expensive part of the program and we could consider 
only excluding a few common possibilities like multiplying or dividing by 1.
Experimentation has shown that this nevertheless greatly inflates the space of 
expressions with moderately slower speeds.

## Implementation
A search tree (`struct Map`) is used to keep track of solutions, and 
expressions are represented as binary trees (`struct ExprTree`) so that 
they can be printed in the usual infix form. When iterating through pairs
of expressions, we take care to only produce expressions using the same 
total number of inputs (incl. duplicates). This lets us limit the number
of iterations, and is also conducive to parallelization.

Using a self-balancing search tree would be a good idea, but the bulk of 
time consumption comes from the large size of the (squared) set of expressions,
which we iterate through in search of new combinations. This is partially mitigated 
by making sure that we first generate only expressions using 2 numbers, then 3, etc., 
which inductively enables us to consider only those pairs which together fit our next target.
The indices that form the boundaries of these categories are tracked in `jumps` attribute
of `struct ExprForest`.

Regarding the 'mask' for tracking numbers that are used in an expression, we 
encode the information into a single integer 
as follows: to each of the numbers we assign a prime number. Then, the mask
of an expression is the product of all such relevant primes. For example, to 25, 50 and 100 we may
assign 2, 3, 5 respectively. Then if we use a 25, two 50's and three 100's, the mask would
be 2x3^2x5^3. Generally this could lead to extremely large numbers, but it is
robust enough that anything generated by 15 distinct values fits into a 64 bit integer.
This representation is useful because expression A uses a subset of those numbers used
by expression B if and only if its mask divides the mask of B. This is therefore more
efficient in both time and memory compared to vectors.

## How to Use
Firstly, in case of distinct inputs, it is not recommended to use input size exceeding 9. If
the memory limit is exceeded (see `MAX_MEMORY_`), the program will exit gracefully.

Compile with 
```
gcc countdown.c -o bin/countdown
```
We input an array of integers &ndash; the first is `N`, the input size
(e.g. 6 numbers in Countdown) followed by `Q`, the number of queries.
The next `N` numbers are the inputs which we can use and the `Q` after that
are the targets we wish to see solutions for. Example input and output:
```
bin/countdown 6 5 100 75 50 25 6 3 952 843 112 19 10998
------
Query: 952
((100+6)*75*3-50)/25
(100+3)*75*6/50+25
2 solutions found.
------
------
Query: 843
(100+50+3)*6-75
(100+25+3)*6+75
2 solutions found.
------
------
Query: 112
100+(75-3)/6
100+50*6/25
100*(25+3)/(75-50)
100*(75+3-50)/25
50*(25+3)*6/75
5 solutions found.
------
------
Query: 19
25-6
100-75-6
75-50-6
75/3-6
25-100*3/50
5 solutions found.
------
------
Query: 10998
0 solutions found.
------
32081 solutions found in total.
Time:0.010771 seconds (10.771000 miliseconds)
Memory freed successfully.
```

## Additional Notes
- The speed, depending on the number of solutions, can vary greatly
depending on the inputs. Large, varied and diverse inputs generate more solutions,
while smaller inputs with many duplicates will be much faster with
larger input sizes feasible. 
- An additional possiblity for optimization is excluding results larger
than a certain threshold. This will exlucde some solutions, but they
may not be interesting to us. With the usual Countdown rules
the largest viable intermediate result is short of 100000.
- Furthermore, we could opt to exclude not only solutions using more numbers than
is needed, but also new ones using exactly those that are needed, i.e. combinations
that we have seen before. This will exclude some unique solutions, but will not 
miss any targets and will further shrink the set of expressions.

## Todo
- Comments should be added to the code.
